Add blog post for Scala Native 0.4 release (#1202)
scala/scala-lang: blog/_posts/2021-01-19-scala-native-0.4-release.md

---
layout: blog-detail
post-type: blog
by: Wojciech Mazur, Scala Center

> title: A sneak peek into the Scala Native 0.4 release

Reviewer: "Sneak peek" doesn't seem like an appropriate phrase to me here. It normally refers to something that isn't done yet or isn't out yet in its entirety, but you give a little glimpse of some part of it. But the 0.4 release is out.

---

> If you ever thought about running your perfect Scala code in an environment other than JVM, you've probably already met

Reviewer: "perfect"? (I guess it's a joke, but I don't feel like the joke lands?)

Scala Native---a project with a promise of instant startup, low memory usage, interop with C libraries, and competitive performance
thanks to [Interflow optimizer](https://scala-native.readthedocs.io/en/latest/blog/interflow.html).

> However, since there have been no release in over a year, you may ask yourself---is this project even alive?<br>

Reviewer: stray `<br>` tag here

> With the long-awaited release 0.4.0 it proves it is! 

Reviewer: Drop "with"

> The long-awaited release 0.4.0, brining support for Scala 2.12 and 2.13, proves it is!

Reviewer: s/brining/bringing/

> Today we are going to discuss the most impacting new features and changes coming in this new major release.

Reviewer: s/impacting/impactful/ ("impacting" is ungrammatical). but "impactful" is business-speak, so maybe a different word entirely, something more conversational like "exciting" or "major"?

> We will start with changes according to Scala Native compiler plugin, especially supported Scala versions and cross-platform testing.

Reviewer: I don't understand "according" here. Maybe "changes made"? But perhaps some other meaning was intended.

Next we will talk about changes to C interoperability and SBT build that need to be taken into account since when working this release.

> Last, but not least we will discuss why we needed to break binary compatibility with previous versions.

Reviewer: remove comma after "last", add comma after "least"

## Support for latest Scala 2 versions
Until now Scala Native supported only Scala 2.11, which is now perceived by most of the developers as deprecated.

> We can proudly announce that Scala Native is now compatible with Scala versions 2.12.13 and 2.13.4, in addition to the 2.11.12 with known bugs fixed.

Reviewer: I think this information should come sooner in the blog post. Like really really soon, perhaps in the first sentence or even the title. By far the single most important information in the entire article is "Scala Native supports Scala 2.12 and 2.13 now". I suggest shouting this from the rooftops.

This used to make using reflective calls very difficult. Fortunately, this is a thing of the past---with release 0.4.0 we
introduced a subset of reflective operations allowed to be used.

It would not be wise to enable reflective calls to all definitions as we would need to load many more objects and increase the size of the binary.
That’s why you need to signal to the compiler which classes can use this mechanism - it can be done by marking your `trait`, `class`, or `object`
with the `@EnableReflectiveInstantation` annotation. It will also make all of its descendants able to be reflectively instantiated.

Annotated classes and modules, having a concrete implementation, can be accessed via the provided `scalanative.reflect.Reflect` API.
If you have used Scala.js before, it may seem similar to you, as the new implementation uses exactly the same API.

## Cross-platform testing using JUnit
Until recently, all our internal tests were executed using our own native testing framework, mainly due to lack of proper
reflection support in Scala Native. After getting rid of this blocker, we have decided to use JUnit instead and in 

> result implemented the native plugin for this framework. Thanks to this change you are also able to also use it in your own projects.  

Reviewer: s/in result/as a result/

> Naturally you are still able to use any other testing framework, as long as it supports Scala Native.

Reviewer: Do such frameworks exist? If so, what are they? (Do popular Scala testing frameworks have, at least, about adding this support?)

> To enable Native JUnit plugin tests, all you need to do is to add the two following lines to your `build.sbt`.

Reviewer: suggest omitting "all you need to do is to"

> As an example Scala Native soon would be supported in [uTest](https://github.com/lihaoyi/utest) and [scalatest](https://github.com/scalatest/scalatest).

Reviewer 2: [Verify](https://github.com/scala/nanotest-strawman) 1.0.0 is now available on Maven Central.

```scala
addCompilerPlugin("org.scala-native" % "junit-plugin" % nativeVersion cross CrossVersion.full)

> libraryDependencies += "org.scala-native" %%% "junit-runtime" % nativeVersion % "test"

Reviewer: it's a bit more idiomatic to say `Test` instead of `"test"`

```

The above settings, when running `sbt test`, would result in the tests being compiled using the SN plugin and executed 
with a native implementation of the JUnit framework. What is more you can easily run your tests both on JVM and Native 

> with a simple adjustment to your build, you can find guide how to do this in [Scala Native reference](https://scala-native.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)

Reviewer: "guide" should either be "guidance" or "a guide". also the comma should either be a period or a semicolon.

Unfortunately, SN is still single-threaded, so if your tests are using concurrency you will need to add the `junit-async`
runtime to your build. It would use the default `ExecutionContext` on the JVM and it would mock concurrent execution in an
event loop in Native - each `Runnable` would be run in order of invocation after finishing the main thread.

```scala
// for JVM submodule
libraryDependencies += "org.scala-native" %% "junit-async" % SNVersion

// for Native submodule
libraryDependencies += "org.scala-native" %%% "junit-async-native" % SNVersion
```

> Scala Native assumes single-threaded execution by default and does not provide multi-threaded programming, 
> however it’s possible to use C libraries to get access to multi-threading and synchronization primitives. 

> > You need to remember it is not officially supported at the moment.

Reviewer: Why is this paragraph a blockquote?

## Interop changes
### Including Native Code in your Application or Library

> Previously, Scala Native used C source files in its build pipeline allowing to mix Scala code with native libraries,

Reviewer: "allowing to mix" isn't grammatical. perhaps "allowing you to mix" or "allowing mixing" or "so you can mix"

With the 0.4.0 release you're able to put your C/C++ sources in the `resources/scala-native` directory inside your project,
and they will be linked and compiled inside the SN pipeline.

As an example you can use it to access macro defined constants and functions or to pass `struct`s from the stack to C functions.
```c
// src/resources/scala-native/example.c
typedef int (*Callback0) (void);

const int EXAMPLE_CONSTANT = 42;

int exec(Callback0 f) {
 return f();
};

```

```scala
// src/main/example.scala
@extern
object example {
 def exec(cb: CFuncPtr0[CInt]): ExecResult = extern

 @name("EXAMPLE_CONSTANT")
 final val someConstant: Int = extern
}
```

### Better interop for functions

> Since 0.3.9 it was possible to pass Scala functions to native libraries by defining `CFuncPtrN` - SAM traits working as 

Reviewer 2: SAM (single abstract method) interface, also known as [_functional interface_](https://docs.oracle.com/en/java/javase/11/docs/api/java.base/java/util/function/package-summary.html) in Java is an interface with one abstract method. Java added lambda expression that would convert to SAM type, and Scala 2.12 [followed suit](https://www.scala-lang.org/news/2.12.0/#lambda-syntax-for-sam-types) to convert Scala's lambda expression to SAM:

```scala
val r: Runnable = () => println("Run!")
```

### Better interop for functions
Since 0.3.9 it was possible to pass Scala functions to native libraries by defining `CFuncPtrN` - SAM traits working as 
a wrapper for Scala functions. Native calls to such functions were done via generated `externForwarder` - method, 

> boxing parameters before passing them to function, and unboxing results. 

Reviewer: to the function

On the other hand, if you wanted to use a native function you could declare it as an `extern`.
This design was quite good, but it did not allow working with generic functions passed to Scala Native as `*void`, or `Ptr[Byte]` in SN syntax.

To support the last scenario, this design was extended and changed. 
You no longer need to implement the `CFuncPtrN` trait which is now private for plugin implementation. 

> Instead, you can use an implicit conversion method taking arbitrary `scala.FunctionN` and returning `CFuncPtrN`.

Reviewer: an implicit conversion from `scala.FunctionN` to `CFuncPtrN`

```scala
type Callback = CFuncPtr1[CInt,Unit]
def registerCallback(cFn: Callback): Unit = extern
def fn(n: CInt): Unit = ???

registerCallback(CFuncPtr1.fromScalaFunction(fn))
registerCallback(fn)

registerCallback { (n: CInt) => println("hello native") }
```

It is now also possible to work with an arbitrary pointer and convert it to `CFuncPtrN` that can be called in your Scala code, 
or to convert your function to any pointer if your native library needs this.

```scala
import scala.scalanative.unsafe.Ptr
val cFnPtr: CFuncPtr0[CInt]    = ???
val fnPtr: Ptr[Byte]           = CFuncPtr.toPtr(cFnPtr)
val fnFromPtr: CFuncPtr0[CInt] = CFuncPtr.fromPtr[CFuncPtr0[CInt]](fnPtr)
```

> ## New Garbage Collector

Reviewer: "garbage collector" should not be capitalized (here, or below)

This release also adds a new Garbage Collector - Commix, a parallel mark and concurrent sweep GC, based on the well known Immix GC.
It reduces GC pause times by utilizing additional processor cores during mark and sweep phases. It was added soon after
the 0.4.0-M2 release, but was only available via an unofficial snapshot.

While the GC itself will use multiple threads, Scala Native still does not support multi-threading in the application code.
Commix GC was written in C and uses `pthread` to work. In case your application needs concurrency support, you may try the experimental library [scala-native-loop](https://github.com/scala-native/scala-native-loop)

## Sbt plugin changes

> ### The introduction of the NativeConfig

Reviewer: Introducing NativeConfig

```scala
nativeConfig ~= (
 _.withMode(build.Mode.releaseFast)
  .withGC(build.GC.immix)
  .withLTO(build.LTO.full)
  .withOptimize(true)
  .withCompileOptions(Nil)
  .withLinkingOptions(Nil)
 )
```

Old style settings keys are still supported, but with lower priority than the new config. They will be removed at some point in the future. In the following example resulting `LTO` setting would be set to `thin`

```scala
nativeConfig := nativeConfig.value
 .withLTO(build.LTO.thin)

nativeLTO := "none"
```

### Cross compiling
By default, Scala Native has always compiled and optimized the resulting assembly based on host architecture and its operating system.
Although it worked well when you were running a program on the same machine, it caused many problems when trying to run it anywhere else.

> With the latest release you're able to define a custom target for compiler by providing [LLVM style TargetTriple](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/CrossCompilation.html) in your config.

Author: Actually it's more then just architecture. It also contains operating system, ABI used, optionally vendor. 
Altough, it looks and reads better

> With the latest release you're able to define a custom target for compiler by providing [LLVM style TargetTriple](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/CrossCompilation.html) in your config.

Reviewer 3: `custom build target` ?

For example, if you're working on Linux and would like to create an executable suitable for MacOS without changing your whole build,
you can use the following sbt setting:
```bash
sbt 'set nativeConfig ~= {_.withTargetTriple("x86_64-apple-darwin<version>")}' myApp/nativeLink
```

> We consider changing target triple as a feature for advanced users, and cannot promise it would currently work with any possible configuration yet.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We consider changing the target triple as an experimental feature for advanced users, and cannot promise it will currently work with any possible configuration yet.
```

However, the number of supported architectures and operating systems would definitely grow in the future.

> > Upcoming release will no longer support SBT 0.13.x

Reviewer 4: This does not seem to be at the right place. Also "This release".

> ## Changes to intermediate representation

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
## Changes to the intermediate representation
```

> NIR (Native Intermediate Representation) is a format used to represent a subset of LLVM instructions, types and values,

> > augmented with a number of high-level primitives that are necessary to efficiently compile Scala,
> > you can read more about in Scala Native [documentation](https://scala-native.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contrib/nir.html).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
> augmented with a number of high-level primitives that are necessary to efficiently compile Scala.
> You can read more about it in the Scala Native [documentation](https://scala-native.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contrib/nir.html).
```

The new release includes many necessary changes to NIR, starting with the way Strings are stored, 
through adding new literals like `Val.ClassOf` and last, but not least support for default methods. 
The last one was introduced to support Scala 2.12 behavior which compiles trait methods as default methods in Java interfaces.

Although we always try to keep our NIR changes to absolute minimum, the number of removed or no longer used primitives used 
in the previous version forced us to break backward binary compatibility. This decision allows us to remove number of known bugs
and easier maintenance in the future. NIR format might still change in following minor releases of Scala Native, but they

> would be fully backward-compatible from now on.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
are going to be be fully backward-compatible from now on.
```

> and easier maintenance in the future. NIR format might still change in following minor releases of Scala Native, but they
> would be fully backward-compatible from now on.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
and easier maintenance in the future. NIR format might still change in following minor releases of Scala Native, but they
would be fully backward-compatible within the 0.4.x series.
```
We don't promise that we won't break it in 0.5.

## How about existing libraries?
Scala Native had many [libraries](https://index.scala-lang.org/search?targetTypes=native&scalaNativeVersions=0.4.0-M2) compatible with SN `0.4.0-M2`.

> Unfortunately, the new release is not binary compatible with them, and you'll need to wait until authors will republish them using Scala Native 0.4.0.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, the new release is not binary compatible with them, and you'll need to wait until authors republish them using Scala Native 0.4.0.
```

However, with increasing interest in running the Scala code natively, it should happen quickly after the release.

## Contributing

> Contributors are always welcome. Tou can support the Scala Native project in multiple ways.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Contributors are always welcome. You can support the Scala Native project in multiple ways.
```

> Contributors are always welcome. Tou can support the Scala Native project in multiple ways.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Contributors are always welcome. You can support the Scala Native project in multiple ways.
```

## Contributing

> Contributors are always welcome, you can support the Scala Native project in multiple ways.

Reviewer: run-on sentence -- change comma to period

> More importantly however, it is to make our ecosystem more native-compatible. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Making our ecosystem more native-compatible is extremely important too.
```

> The most straightforward way of doing so is by working on the plugin itself, take a look at our [contributors’ guide](https://scala-native.readthedocs.io/en/latest/contrib/index.html).

Reviewer: another run-on. replace comma with period

Scala Native compiler does not operate on JVM bytecode, but on its own intermediate representation distributed in `*.nir` files in resulting JAR.

> Library dependencies not compiled with Scala Native would fail when linking. You can help by developing tools

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Library dependencies not compiled with Scala Native would fail when linking. Therefore, you can help by developing tools
```

> More importantly however, it is to make our ecosystem more native-compatible, this means developing tools and libraries that are not dependent from Java internals.

Reviewer: another run-on. replace comma after "native-compatible" with period

> and libraries not using Java standard library. For example, you can take a look at [sconfig](https://github.com/ekrich/sconfig) - 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
and libraries which do not depend on the Java standard library. For example, you can take a look at [sconfig](https://github.com/ekrich/sconfig) - 
```

> For example, you can take a look at [sconfig](https://github.com/ekrich/sconfig) - a Scala port of the widely used Lightbend Config

Reviewer: the end of this sentence seems to be missing, maybe "library."

> Only Scala source files can be used by the Scala Native plugin.

> > Distributed libraries contain `.nir` files in their JARs which are crucial in making the SN plugin able to link them correctly.

Reviewer: why is this paragraph a blockquote?

## Summary
Scala Native is starting to keep up with the rest of the Scala ecosystem.

> We expect it will bloom before long with the release, resulting in many libraries and tools.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We expect it will bloom quickly thanks to this release, resulting in many libraries and tools.
```
expect might be a very strong word here. Maybe *hope* or *believe* or *are confident that*

> I think you can agree with me now, that Scala Native is starting to keep up with the rest of the Scala ecosystem.

Reviewer: omit "I think you can agree with me now, that "

> With introduced support for recent Scala versions it is much more approachable for the users, and combined with easier testing 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Supporting recent Scala versions makes it much more approachable for the users, and easier testing through JUnit support improves overall usability
```

> We are expecting it would bloom short after the release with a lot of libraries and tools.

Reviewer: We expect it will bloom before long with

With introduced support for recent Scala versions it is much more approachable for the users, and combined with easier testing 
may improve its overall quality.

Even though resources allocated into this project were quite limited, we have managed to fulfill all our goals announced 
last year in [Scala Native Next Steps](https://contributors.scala-lang.org/t/scala-native-next-steps/4216). Currently, this

> project is developed by a single engineer working full-time, thanks to our cooperation with VirtusLab. 

Reviewer: I thought Seb was working on Scala Native too, is that not the case?

Reviewer 4: Not really. I "lead" the project, I give directions, and I vet PRs. But I write virtually no code for it. A true manager. 😅

We also appreciate and would like to thank our community contributors for the huge amounts of work they have done for this project.

There are many plans for the future of Scala Native, few things you can expect is for sure integration with the Scala 3 
and better support for different architectures, like ARM. Stay tuned for next updates...

> 

Reviewer: We have many plans for the future of Scala Native. Our top priorities include Scala 3 support and support for more architectures such as ARM.

> > For more changes coming in Scala Native 0.4.0 check out [changelog website](https://scala-native.readthedocs.io/en/latest/changelog.html)

Reviewer: Shouldn't be a blockquote IMO.
